Create inline_link_in_paragraph_is_distinguishable_ be4d0c.md (#1010)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/inline-link-in-paragraph-is-distinguishable-be4d0c.md

**Note:** The test targets are visible link elements that are part of a block of content that is displayed inline.

## Expectation

For each test target, the [outcome][] of one of the following rules is "passed":

- [Inline link has distinguishable content](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/e7cc2b)
- [Inline link has distinguishable style not based on color alone](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/88407d)
- [Inline link has distinguishable border](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/36f116)
- [Inline link has distinguishable box-shadow](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/66e9f0)
- [Inline link has different foreground color and distinguishable style on hover and focus](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/548868)
- [Inline link has different background color and distinguishable style on hover and focus](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/2803b8)

## Assumptions

- This rule assumes that [`br` HTML elements][br] are only used for line breaks that are actually part of the content and not for separating thematic groups of the content. 

> - This rule assumes that the link is distinguishable from the rest of the text with color, which means it fails SC 1.4.1 when there is not another way to distinguish it.

Author: From what I recall, this is here to state that the link's text is distinguishable from the other text by color, since that is where SC 1.4.1 applies. @ShadowBB please correct me if I'm wrong.

- This rule assumes that if `box-shadow` is used in the different visible text nodes of the _ancestor_ element then `box-shadow` can not be a distinguishing factor.
- This rule assumes that if `border` is used in the different visible text nodes of the _ancestor_ element then `border` can not be a distinguishing factor.

## Accessibility Support

_No accessibility support issues known._

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html)
- [G183: Using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and providing additional visual cues on focus for links or controls where color alone is used to identify them](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G183)
- [F73: Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to creating links that are not visually evident without color vision](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F73)
- [C15: Using CSS to change the presentation of a user interface component when it receives focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C15)

## Test Cases

> ### Passed

Author: @WilcoFiers I'm not sure I agree it should pass. There is nothing in these links, apart from color, to distinguish them from the text (the slashes). This results in a sighted user (probably most sighted users, not just colorblind) failing to understand if there is one, three or four links in this paragraph. On the other blind, a blind user will have no doubt that there are three links in there.

@ShadowBB what is your take on this?

> ### Passed

Reviewer: Although Carlos has a point, that this could still cause accessibility issues, I don't think we can truly let this example fail for this particular rule because the fact that it is placed in this menu like style communicates visually to the user that these are links.

However you could argue that this example already passes, because it would pass rule "e7cc2b" because the content (in this case slashes) makes it visually apparent that these are links.

> ### Passed

Reviewer: After reading f73 again, I am am not so sure about what I said here on 29-April.

It seems that a menu like this:

```
<style> a { text-decoration:none }</style>
<p>
  <a href="//W3.org/">W3C</a> / 
  <a href="//W3.org/WAI/">WAI</a> / 
  <a href="//W3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/">Standards / Guidelines</a>
</p>
```

Should fail because the links in there are not "visually identifiable via some other means" in any objective way.

> ### Passed

Author: @WilcoFiers I would fail this because color is the only means of conveying what is a link. You cannot use the slash as a distinguishing feature because you don't have 4 links, which is implied by the 3 slashes. Remove the color information and tell me how many links are there.

> ### Passed

Author: Having re-read this thread, I admit I was looking at this from a wrong perspective. Every link in there has something that indicates it is a link (the slash adjacent to it). I was concerned with the last entry that should have been split in two links (because of the slash), but that is irrelevant to this rule.

On a positive note, that is a pass, given that, as you say, there is distinguishing content indicating that it is a link!

> ### Passed

Author: No longer relevant, given that we dropped the expectation about content being used to distinguish links.

#### Passed Example 1

This is a link that is a descendant of a paragraph element, and therefore in an inline block of content. An icon is added to distinguish it as a link.

```html
<style>
	*,
	a.test {
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>
<p>
	Read about WAI on the
	<a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage <img src="/test-assets/be4d0c/icon.png" alt=""/></a>.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 2

This is a link that is a descendant of a paragraph element, and therefore in an inline block of content. Text is added to distinguish it as a link.

```html
<style>

> 	*,

Reviewer 2: What is this for?

	a.test {
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>

> <p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage by following this link</a>.</p>

Author: I've replied to this in the atomic rule.

```

> #### Passed Example 3

Reviewer 2: I think this should be example 1; this is the best way to do it, lets put that in first.

This is a link that is a descendant of a paragraph element, and therefore in an inline block of content. It uses the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishing style.

```html
<style>
	* {

> 		text-decoration: none;

Reviewer 2: I don't think this style is necessary for the example, is it? Same for other ones like this.

	}
	a {
		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 4

The element with a [semantic role][] that inherits from link is a descendant of a paragraph element, and therefore in an inline block of content. It uses the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishing style.

```html
<style>
	* {
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a {
		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>This is indicated in the cost of a <a href="#bcc0f155" role="doc-glossref">credit default swap</a>.</p>
<h1>Glossary</h1>
<p id="bcc0f155">
	A credit default swap (CDS) is a financial derivative or contract that allows an investor to "swap" or offset his or
	her credit risk with that of another investor.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 5

This is a link that is a descendant of a paragraph element, and therefore in an inline block of content. The link has a distinguishing bottom border in addition to being distinguishable by color.

```html
<style>

> 	* {

Reviewer 2: If you're setting foreground color, always also set the background.
```suggestion
	p {
		background: white;
```

---
id: be4d0c

> name: Inline link in paragraph is distinguishable

Reviewer 2: Why are you using "paragraph" in these names / files. Why not just say:

```suggestion
name: Inline link is distinguishable
```

I would argue by saying this is an inline link, that's a better qualifier than saying it's a paragraph.

rule_type: composite

description: |
  This rule checks that links that are embedded in a paragraph, list or cell have a way to distinguish them from the surrounding text

accessibility_requirements: # Remove whatever is not applicable
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed

> input_aspects:

Author: This got lost when the rule moved from atomic to composite. Nice catch.

  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling

acknowledgements:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
  previous authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any HTML element which:

- has the [semantic role][] of ['link'][link] or a [semantic role][] that inherits from the ['link'][link] role; and
- is a [descendant][] in the [flat tree][] of a `p`, `li` or `td` HTML elements or elements with a [semantic role][] of ['listitem'][listitem] or ['cell'][cell] (with the closest [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] being henceforth referred to as the _ancestor_ element); and
- has [descendant][] [text nodes][text node] in the [flat tree][] that are [visible][]; and

> - the _ancestor_ element has other [descendant][] [visible][] [text nodes][text node] in the [flat tree][].

Author: (this is blowing my mind!)

I only see two ways to get out of this:

1. Try to come up with an applicability that uses the concept of [paragraphs](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/#paragraphs)
2. Include an assumption stating the style of the elements involved in the applicability does not "break the flow" of the textual content

I would prefer option 2. Would you be okay with that @WilcoFiers?

> - the _ancestor_ element has other [descendant][] [visible][] [text nodes][text node] in the [flat tree][].

Reviewer 2: I'm not so sure about either option. I think coming up with a definition partially based on the computed property of `display` makes the most sense to me. You'll need to take linebreaks into account here.

---
id: be4d0c
name: Inline link is distinguishable
rule_type: composite

description: |
  This rule checks that links that are embedded in a paragraph, list or cell have a way to distinguish them from the surrounding text

accessibility_requirements: # Remove whatever is not applicable
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed

input_rules:
  - e7cc2b
  - 88407d
  - 36f116
  - 66e9f0
  - 548868
  - 2803b8

acknowledgements:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
  previous authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

> This rule applies to any HTML element which:

Reviewer 2: I must apologise. I've read this 5 times and I still don't know what it means. Is there a way you can rephrase this to make it clearer?

Author: Added a note and some explaining remarks. Hope it helps.

- has the [semantic role][] of ['link'][link] or a [semantic role][] that inherits from the ['link'][link] role; and
- has [descendant][] [text nodes][text node] in the [flat tree][] that are [visible][]; and

> - is a [descendant][] in the [flat tree][] of an HTML element (with the closest [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] being henceforth referred to as the _ancestor_ element) that has a [computed value][] for the [display property][display] that is not one of the following: 'table', 'flex', 'grid', 'ruby', 'table-row-group', 'table-header-group', 'table-footer-group', 'table-row', table-column-group', 'table-column', 'ruby-base-container' and 'ruby-text-container'; and

Reviewer 3: Which atomic rule does the `display` requirement come from? I can't seem to find it 🤔

Author: It wasn't from a specific atomic rule, but from a general comment from @WilcoFiers in this thread: https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1010#discussion_r390865422

Reviewer 3: Ah, we cannot do that though; the applicability of a composite rule must be the union of the applicabilities of the atomic rules it composes: https://www.w3.org/TR/act-rules-format/#applicability-composite

Author: But it will be. All atomic rules will have this applicability (I did not update them because I wanted to reach a stable definition of the applicability before moving onto the atomic rules).

Reviewer 3: Gotcha, all good then! 😄

---
id: be4d0c
name: Inline link is distinguishable
rule_type: composite
description: |

>   This rule checks that inline links have a way to distinguish them from the surrounding text

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  This rule checks that inline links have a way to distinguish them from any surrounding text other than color alone.
```

accessibility_requirements: # Remove whatever is not applicable
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_rules:
  - e7cc2b
  - 88407d
  - 36f116
  - 66e9f0
  - 548868
  - 2803b8
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: The element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and

> - **non-link line text**: The element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][].

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **surrounding non-link line text**: The element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][].
```

## Expectation

For each test target, the [outcome][] of one of the following rules is "passed":

- [Inline link has distinguishable content](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/e7cc2b)
- [Inline link has distinguishable style not based on color alone](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/88407d)
- [Inline link has distinguishable border](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/36f116)
- [Inline link has distinguishable box-shadow](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/66e9f0)
- [Inline link has different foreground color and distinguishable style on hover and focus](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/548868)
- [Inline link has different background color and distinguishable style on hover and focus](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/2803b8)

> ## Assumptions

Reviewer 5: You need an assumption that HTML has not been mishandled too heavily.

I can have a link without styling at one end of the DOM, and an element at the other end of the DOM which has a border and happen to be rendered just on top of the link due to some "clever" positioning. This would fail the rule (the link has no distinguishable styling or content) but pass the SC (the link is totally visually different from the rest).

Even worse, it could be a distant `canvas` which happens to draw a rectangle just around the link, so no style is applied.

Author: Added an assumption for this.

- The link is distinguishable from the rest of the text with color, which means it fails SC 1.4.1 when there is not another way to distinguish it.

> - The 3:1 contrast difference between text is minimal to what would be sufficient to meet WCAG 2.0. This value is part of [technique G183](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G183), but is not specified in the [1.4.1 success criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html).

Author: Thanks for the suggestion @Jym77 
I'm going to try to rewrite this, but I think I'll keep another atomic (the differences in content)

- Any change in font is sufficiently distinguishable, and fonts are loaded when they are present.

> - If multiple colors are used in the visible text nodes of the _ancestor_ element then color can not be a distinguishing factor.

Author: I've rephrased it to sound more like an assumption

- [F73: Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to creating links that are not visually evident without color vision](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F73)
- [C15: Using CSS to change the presentation of a user interface component when it receives focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C15)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

This link, that is a descendant of a paragraph element, uses the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishing style.

```html
<style>
	a {
		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 2

This link, that is a descendant of a paragraph element, has an icon that makes it distinguishable as a link.

```html
<style>
	a.test {
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>
<p>
	Read about WAI on the
	<a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage <img src="/test-assets/be4d0c/icon.png" alt="" /></a>.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 3

This link, that is a descendant of a paragraph element, has text that makes it distinguishable as a link.

> 

Author: This is a good discussion to have. Interestingly, you don't raise the issue when an icon is used, but I feel the problem is the same as when using text to indicate the presence of a link.
Both text and images are visual ways to indicate links (so they should meet SC 1.4.1), but they do raise those concerns. What is everyone's opinion about this?

> 

Reviewer 4: Icons stand out, even if their meaning might be misconstrued.  Text doesn't stand out, in addition to being misunderstood.

Perhaps the example needs to be worded slightly differently so there is less implication the link is coming up next. I'll add a suggestion.

		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI website</a>.</p>
```

#### Failed Example 2

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has a different style because of its color and background color. But when the link has been visited, the style is the same of the other text on the same line (only the hue is different).

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: hsl(0, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: #111111;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:visited {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/">WAI website</a>.</p>
```

### Inapplicable

#### Inapplicable Example 1

There is no [semantic link][] element.

```html
<p>Read about WAI on the <u>underlined text</u>.</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

This link is not [visible][].

```html
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI" style="visibility:hidden">WAI website</a>.</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

This link with no text nodes has no **link text**.

```html
<p>
	Read about WAI on the

> 	<a href="http://w3.org/WAI"><img src="test-assets/shared/w3c-logo.png" alt="WAI" /></a>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	<a href="http://w3.org/WAI"><img src="test-assets/shared/w3c-logo.png" alt="WAI"></a>
```

---
id: be4d0c
name: Inline link has distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links are distinguishable from the surrounding text through a difference in style not based on color (hue) alone.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
  previous_authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

> This rule applies to each [link history state][] of any [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

Reviewer 5: Also, slight consequence of having the link history state in Applicability: each test case now has two targets ((link, `:link`) and (link, `:visited`)) but the descriptions do not really reflect that. We can probably cover this globally since it is the case for each case (in https://act-rules.github.io/rules/oj04fd#background and #421, I did it with a note at the end of the Background section, i.e. just before the test cases, but other ways are possible).

This does ripple a bit to Failed Example 2 where one of the targets (the `:link` one) passes the rule, but the other fails it.

Reviewer 3: Hold on a minute, reading your comment I've come in doubt about this "link history state" thing 🤔 What does it mean for semantic link to have a `:link` or `:visited` state? I initially read it as "when the semantic link matches `:link` or `:visited`", but that will not work as those selectors will only ever match actual hyperlinks, such as `<a>` and `<link>` elements, not something like `<span role="link">`.

Author: Good catch @kasperisager 
I've removed the "link history state" from the applicability and created a new expectation to deal with it when the semantic link can have the `:link`and `:visited` pseudo-classes.
This also solved the issue @Jym77 was raising, since the "list history state" was removed from the applicability.

---
id: be4d0c
name: Inline link has distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links are distinguishable from the surrounding text through a difference in style not based on color (hue) alone.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling

>   - Language

Reviewer 5: Language is not needed anymore, I think.

Author: Correct

	}
	a {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:focus {
		font-style: italic;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 9

This link has a descendant element with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line and has a distinguishable bottom border when it is hovered or focused.

```html
<style>
	a {
		text-decoration: none;
	}

	a:hover span,
	a:focus span {
		border-bottom: 2px solid currentColor;
	}
</style>

<p>
	Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI"><span>WAI webpage</span></a
	>.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 10

This link has a **different hue** from the other text in the same line in both link history states. The link has distinguishing color and background color. The color and background color are different when in the visited state, but these are also distinguishing colors.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: hsl(0, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a:link {
		color: white;
		background-color: blue;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:visited {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: lightgray;
	}
</style>

> <p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI website</a>.</p>
```

```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has no other visual cues of being recognized as a link because the underline has been removed. Even though the link has a different color from the other text the low difference in contrast (1.2:1) between them means they are not distinguishing colors.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: hsl(0, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>

> <p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI website</a>.</p>
```

```

#### Failed Example 2

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has a different style because of its color and background color. But when the link has been visited, the style is the same of the other text on the same line (only the hue is different).

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: hsl(0, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: #111111;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:visited {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
</style>

> <p>Read about WAI on the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/">WAI webpage</a>.</p>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/">WAI website</a>.</p>
```

```

### Inapplicable

#### Inapplicable Example 1

There is no [semantic link][] element.

```html
<p>Read about WAI on the <u>underlined text</u>.</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

This link is not [visible][].

```html

> <p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI" style="visibility:hidden">WAI webpage</a>.</p>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI" style="visibility:hidden">WAI website</a>.</p>
```

```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

This link with no text nodes has no **link text**.

```html
<p>
	Read about WAI on the
	<a href="http://w3.org/WAI"><img src="test-assets/shared/w3c-logo.png" alt="WAI" /></a>

> 	webpage.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
	website.
```

</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 4

This link is the only text rendered in its line, so there is no **non-link line text**.

```html

> <p><a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a></p>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<p><a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI website</a></p>
```

```

#### Inapplicable Example 5

Each link is the only text rendered in their respective lines, so there is no **non-link line text**.

```html
<ul>
	<li><a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/non-text-content.html">SC 1.1.1</a></li>
	<li><a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/audio-only-and-video-only-prerecorded">SC 1.2.1</a></li>
</ul>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 6

There is no text belonging to non [semantic links][semantic link] in this line.

```html
<p><a href="https://www.w3.org">W3C </a><span role="link" onclick="location='https://www.w3.org/WAI/'">WAI</span></p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 7

This link is not distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text rendered in its line.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: #0a415c; /* hsl(200,80,20) */
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: #19a1e6; /* hsl(200,80,50); */
		background-color: white;
	}
</style>

> <p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI website</a>.</p>
```

```

[adequate inspection state]: #adequate-inspection-state 'Definition of adequate inspection state'
[ancestor]: https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-tree-ancestor 'Definition of ancestor'
[background color]: #background-colors-of-element 'Definition of background colors of element'

> [default page language]: #default-page-language

Reviewer 5: This def is not used anymore and fails the test.

---
id: be4d0c
name: Inline link has distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links are distinguishable from the surrounding text through a difference in style not based on color (hue) alone.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
  previous_authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the [semantic link][] element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the [semantic link][] element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and

> - **different hue**: the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the [semantic link][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the [background colors][background color] of the [semantic link][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

Author: Agree that colors should be plural for the link's foreground and background (and they are already). I don't agree with that for the text around it. If the text has multiple colors, then how can you use color to distinguish what is a link? There is an assumption already addressing that.

## Expectation 1

> For each test target, there exists at least one [inspection state][] that is not [focused][] and [hovered][] at the same time and at least one [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or [ancestor][] element that is not an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text**, such that the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or the [ancestor][] element has a [distinguishable style][] from each element containing **non-link line text**.

Author: I tried splitting it out into a list

---
id: be4d0c
name: Inline link has either distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone or content that indicates it is a link
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links are distinguishable from the surrounding text through a difference in style not based on color (hue) alone or have content that indicates they are links.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and

> - **different hue**: the element's [foreground colors][foreground color] and the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the element's [background colors][background color] and the [background colors][background color] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

Author: Agree with the simplification of the applicability, but I think it won't hurt to leave the definition between sets of colors (because it might be used for comparing sets in the future).

## Accessibility Support

_No accessibility support issues known._

## Background

Some examples for this rule change the default user agent styling of links. This is done to illustrate the rule. Changing the default styles of links is not endorsed by this rule.

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html)
- [G183: Using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and providing additional visual cues on focus for links or controls where color alone is used to identify them](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G183)
- [F73: Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to creating links that are not visually evident without color vision](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F73)
- [C15: Using CSS to change the presentation of a user interface component when it receives focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C15)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

> This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishable style.

Reviewer 5: "that is distinguishable by color" feels dangerously close to "distinguishable color" (even worse in Passed Example 5) which is about contrast, not hue… (+ link for distinguishable style)
```suggestion
This link, that has **different hue** from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a [distinguishable style][].
```
(same for other example descriptions)

	<a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage <img class="hide" src="/test-assets/be4d0c/icon.png" alt="" /></a>.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 12

This link had a descendant element that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line and has a distinguishable bottom border when it is hovered or focused.

```html
<style>
	a {
		text-decoration: none;
	}

	a:hover span,
	a:focus span {
		border-bottom: 2px solid currentColor;
	}
</style>

<p>
	Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI"><span>WAI webpage</span></a
	>.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 13

This link is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line in both link history states. The link has distinguishing color and background color. The color and background color are different when in the visited state, but these are also distinguishing colors.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a:link {
		color: white;
		background-color: blue;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:visited {
		color: blue;
		background-color: lightgray;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

> This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has no other visual cues of being recognized as a link with the underline removed. Even though the link has a different color (blue) from the other text (black) the low difference in contrast between them means they are not distinguishing colors.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has no other visual cues of being recognized as a link because the underline has been removed. Even though the link has a different color (blue) from the other text (black) the low difference in contrast between them means they are not distinguishing colors.
```

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Failed Example 2

This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has a different style because of its color and foreground color. But when the link has been visited, the style is the same of the other text on the same line.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: lightblue;
		background-color: #111111;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:visited {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;

> 	}

Reviewer 5: Should it be kept with a `color:blue` so that it still has a different hue from the rest of the text 🤔 
If a user somehow arrives on the page with the link already visited, it wouldn't even be applicable due to the same hue…

So, I'm not sure that written that way it is a failure of 1.4.1… (in the `:visited` state, the author is not using color, so 1.4.1 does not apply).

Which might need an update of the rule 😱 Either taking the link history in Applicability ("different hue in each of the link history states"); or back in the expectation ("For all link history state with different hue"), but that raises the question of which state to test the Applicability in…
I guess the fully explicit way would be A: "different hue in at least one link history state", E: "For each link history state with different hue"…

Author: Nice catch... thinking about it, this is my understanding:
- 1.4.1 applies to links with link states where there are differences in hue, and only to those link states
- accordingly, the expectation should be checked only in the link states where 1.4.1 is applicable

So, I agree with your (fully explicit) suggestion :-)

</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

> ### Inapplicable

Reviewer 5: Seem to be missing a case for **link text** (an image link, I guess).

#### Inapplicable Example 1

There is no [semantic link][] element.

```html
<p>Read about WAI on the <u>underlined text</u>.</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

This link is not [visible][].

```html
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI" style="visibility:hidden">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

> This link is the only text rendered in its line.

Reviewer 5: Refer to the named conditions:
```suggestion
This link is the only text rendered in its line, so there is no **non-link line text**.
```
(same in other Inapplicable examples)

---
id: be4d0c
name: Inline link has either distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone or content that indicates it is a link
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links are distinguishable from the surrounding text through a difference in style not based on color (hue) alone or have content that indicates they are links.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

> - **link text**: the element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and

Reviewer 7: I am seeing this style of authoring applicability for the first time, where we prefix a line item with something like a definition per se:

- def 1: description. 

It kind of implies to me that the description is secondary & the sentence does not flow right.

```suggestion
- the element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
```

Simply removing the prefix makes it better in my opinion.

Author: I'm just following the rule design instructions for listed conditions: https://act-rules.github.io/pages/design/rule-design/#listed-conditions

They apply to lists in both applicability and expectations. I guess we haven't had rules with lists of conditions in the applicability recently. 

I'm keeping this unless you really want me to change it.

- **non-link line text**: the element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and

> - **different hue**: the element's [foreground colors][foreground color] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][] in at least one [link history state][], or the element's [background colors][background color] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][] in at least one [link history state][].

Author: > The Use of Color success criterion addresses changing only the color (hue) of an object or text without otherwise altering the object's form.

This is quoted from the [understanding document of SC 1.4.11](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/non-text-contrast.html)
After Jean-Yves noticed this, this rule was changed accordingly to focus on hue.
You can check this in the last assumption of the rule.

> - **different hue**: the element's [foreground colors][foreground color] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][] in at least one [link history state][], or the element's [background colors][background color] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][] in at least one [link history state][].

Author: Good catch

> - **different hue**: the element's [foreground colors][foreground color] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][] in at least one [link history state][], or the element's [background colors][background color] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][] in at least one [link history state][].

Author: Because those are checked in the expectation. We want to apply the rule to a link that uses colour to distinguish itself (and we check if there exists a colour different when the link hasn't been visited or when it has). In the expectation we check if the link has another distinguishing style besides color (always, on hover or on focus).

> - **different hue**: the element's [foreground colors][foreground color] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][] in at least one [link history state][], or the element's [background colors][background color] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][] in at least one [link history state][].

Author: That's specified in the previous item of the list. I decided to reference elements using the conditions in the list, otherwise the text would become too difficult to parse. So, we're talking about the text nodes of the elements rendered on the same line. 

Let me know if you think this way to reference the conditions on a list should not be used. If this is a problem, it can be fixed by introducing another set of definitions.

## Expectation

> For each [link history state][] with a **different hue** there exists at least one [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] and one [adequate inspection state][] of the test target such that at least one of the following is true:

Author: Good suggestion!

> For each [link history state][] with a **different hue** there exists at least one [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] and one [adequate inspection state][] of the test target such that at least one of the following is true:

Author: Good catch. Included ancestors of the element that are not ancestors of the other elements on the line.

> - **distinguishing style**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has a [distinguishable style][] from each element containing **non-link line text**; or

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has a [distinguishable style][] from each element containing **non-link line text**; or
```

Same thought process a previous comment.

Author: I think you need to suggest changes to the rule design instructions 😉

Reviewer 7: I will make an issue and bring it up. But not a blocker for this one.

> - **distinguishing content**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.

Author: According to the dictionary "immediately preceding of following content". Do you prefer this?

> - **distinguishing content**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.

Author: I do agree with you. As you can see in https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1010/files/64cce50845daa861b304f0e2a4a42c1e484310ae#r512906965 what was concerning was a different issue. 
We discussed this, and while we agree that this is not objective, we don't find it ambiguous. Hoping that now you understand what was raising my concerns, do you still think this is an issue?

> - **distinguishing content**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.

Reviewer 2: I do. Other than actual text saying "link", or an icon of it, what could be "indicates the test target is a link"? It isn't the separator itself doesn't indicate this is a link; it is clear from the context. The separator indicates where one link starts and the other ends.

> - **distinguishing content**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.

Author: OK. I agree that, in this example, is not the content by itself but the content plus the context that indicates it is a link (and where it begins and ends).

I would be okay changing the condition to something like:

- **distinguishing content**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] [text nodes][text node] or the [visible][] [inclusive sibling][] [text nodes][text node] include the word "link" (or a translation of "link" to the document's language).

I don't think we can do something similar for an icon without going the "indicates it is a link" route again.

@ShadowBB Do you agree with this proposed solution? Or do you want to argue for the previous version?

@WilcoFiers Would this solution work for you?

> - **distinguishing content**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.

Reviewer 5: I say it's a bit sad we can't handle link icons, but it's probably better that way…

Also, a bit worried about the "inclusive sibling text nodes" since most text nodes have no sibling (only a parent element node with siblings with children text nodes…) That is in
```html
<span>Click this link:</span><a class="different-hue">example.org</a>
```
the text node "example.org" does not have any sibling (the `span` is a sibling of the `a`), but I understand this is the case we want to handle with the condition…

> - **distinguishing content**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.

Author: Thanks for pointing this out @Jym77 
My intention was "the text nodes of the inclusive descendants + the text nodes of the inclusive siblings". which would apply to your example

> - **distinguishing content**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.

Reviewer 5: 👍 
That is fairly lax in allowing
```html
<span>link. And now, 10 lines of Lorem Ipsum</span><a class="different-hue">example.org</a>
```
where the indication can be fairly far away from the actual link. While the previous version required the indication to be "adjacent content" and would likely have hailed that.

Again, not a real problem, and not sure we can really do better for now…

## Accessibility Support

_No accessibility support issues known._

## Background

Some examples for this rule change the default user agent styling of links. This is done to illustrate the rule. Changing the default styles of links is not endorsed by this rule. With most user agents, this rule passes with the default style; explicit styles are added to make sure the examples work as intended.

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html)
- [G183: Using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and providing additional visual cues on focus for links or controls where color alone is used to identify them](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G183)
- [F73: Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to creating links that are not visually evident without color vision](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F73)
- [C15: Using CSS to change the presentation of a user interface component when it receives focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C15)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

> This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishable style.

Reviewer 2: The contrast between black and blue is 8.6:1. This and many more of these examples pass just because of that. Someone can pass this example just by looking up the contrast; without having to test for underline.

Author: Good point. Changing the examples to use colors that differ only on their hue, and that do not meet contrast levels.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 2

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links (underline) when it is focused or hovered.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		text-decoration: none;
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a:hover,
	a:focus {
		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 3

This link, with a background with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishable style.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: black;

> 		background-color: #indianred;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		background-color: indianred;
```

		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 4

This element with a [semantic role][] that inherits from link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishable style.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>This is indicated in the cost of a <a href="#bcc0f155" role="doc-glossref">credit default swap</a>.</p>
<h1>Glossary</h1>
<p id="bcc0f155">
	A credit default swap (CDS) is a financial derivative or contract that allows an investor to "swap" or offset his or
	her credit risk with that of another investor.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 5

> This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable color because the color contrast is 4.98.

Reviewer 2: Contrast is only accurate to a single digit and needs to be expressed as a ratio.

```suggestion
This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable color because the color contrast is 5.0:1.
```

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable bottom border when it is hovered or focused.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:hover,
	a:focus {
		border-style: solid;
		border-color: red;
		border-width: 0px;
		border-bottom-width: 1px;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 7

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable box-shadow.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
		box-shadow: 4px 4px;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 8

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable font-style when it is focused.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:focus {

> 		font-style: italic;

Reviewer 2: This shouldn't be what makes this pass. It needs at least a hover style too.

Author: Current expectation is that if there is a way to distinguish the link from the other line text either on hover, on focus, or with none of them, then the rule passes. It doesn't require it to be both on focus and hover. There is nothing in the SC stating that it needs to happen on both. So we might be passing the rule when the SC is not satisfied, but certainly enforcing the fail-on-fail relationship.

Author: Just to clarify something: passing this rule does not mean SC 1.4.1 is satisfied. However, failing the rule means SC 1.4.1 is not satisfied. 

So, what we are saying in the rule is that, if the link does not have something that distinguishes it from the surrounding text in one of 3 scenarios (always, when hovered, or when focused) then it fails SC 1.4.1. When it does have something to distinguish it in at least one of those scenarios we cannot fail it. Given that SC 1.4.1 does not require the distinguishing style to exist both on hover and focus we cannot require that to fail.

Author: Examples updated so that all examples which are not meeting the new expectation 3 were moved to failed examples.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>
<p>
	Read about WAI on the
	<a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage <img src="/test-assets/be4d0c/icon.png" alt="" /></a>.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 10

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has text that makes it distinguishable as a link.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>
<p>To read about WAI, <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">follow this link to the WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 11

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has an icon that appears when the link is hovered. This icon indicates the element is a link.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	.hide {
		display: none;
	}

> 	a:hover img.hide {

Reviewer 2: This should also happen on focus. I don't think this passes WCAG otherwise.

Author: See https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1010#discussion_r512993049

	>.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 13

This link has a **different hue** from the other text in the same line in both link history states. The link has distinguishing color and background color. The color and background color are different when in the visited state, but these are also distinguishing colors.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a:link {
		color: white;
		background-color: blue;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:visited {
		color: blue;
		background-color: lightgray;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has no other visual cues of being recognized as a link because the underline has been removed. Even though the link has a different color (blue) from the other text (black) the low difference in contrast between them means they are not distinguishing colors.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>

> <p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>

Reviewer 2: Why does this fail? The contrast between the text nodes is 8.6:1.

Author: Fixed

---
id: be4d0c

> name: Inline link has either distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone or content that indicates it is a link

Author: @mitchellevan "indicates it is a link", which is close to what is used in the rule's expectation, seems to be raising concerns. Would the solution proposed in https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1010/files#r516539822 work for you?
(of course that, following the update in the expectation, I would update the rule name and description accordingly)

rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links are distinguishable from the surrounding text through a difference in style not based on color (hue) alone or have content that indicates they are links.
accessibility_requirements:
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
  previous_authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to each [link history state][] of any [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the [semantic link][] element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and

> - **non-link line text**: the [semantic link][] element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and

Author: I understand what you are saying, which is similar to how this rule started (a year ago!). The problem we found was how to define objectively what is a _block of text_. The _rendered on a line_ definition uses the CSS specs to make sure that the meaning is objective.

And someone that would shrink the viewport just to make the web content inapplicable for this rule would be gaming the system, not a problem I would expect from expert testers.

- The same `box-shadow` is used by all the visible text nodes of the [line rendering][rendered on a line] element that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][], otherwise `box-shadow` can not be a distinguishing factor.
- The same text style is used by all the visible text nodes of the [line rendering][rendered on a line] element that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][], otherwise the [text style properties][] can not be a distinguishing factor.
- The perceived visual styling of elements is the result of CSS styling applied to those elements and inherited from their [ancestor][] elements. Through manipulation of the positioning and styles of other elements, including non inherited styles of [ancestor][] elements, an element may end up with a perceived distinguishable style not resulting from its own and inherited styling. In that case, this rule might fail while the [Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html) might still be satisfied.

> - This rule considers that [Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html) only applies if the elements have different hues as stated in the [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.11: Non-text Contrast](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/non-text-contrast.html) document. If the hues are the same and saturation or lightness are not, this creates a difference in contrast, not in the perceived color and [Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html) does not apply. If [Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html) applies to elements that have the same hue but different saturation and lightness, this rule will be inapplicable while [Success Criterion 1.4.1 Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html) may still fail.

Reviewer 8: 1.4.1 is about using a _color_ difference to convey information. I am not aware of any general consensus that 1.4.1 limits color differences only to hue differences. It's fine to limit this _rule_ to hue, but then make it clear it's only about the rule not about 1.4.1 itself.

Author: I'm pasting the full paragraph from the [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.11: Non-text Contrast](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/non-text-contrast.html)

> The Use of Color success criterion addresses changing only the color (hue) of an object or text without otherwise altering the object's form. The principle is that contrast ratio (the difference in brightness) can be used to distinguish text or graphics. For example, G183: Using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and providing additional visual cues on focus for links or controls where color alone is used to identify them is a technique to use a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text to distinguish links and controls. In that case the Working Group regards a link color that meets the 3:1 contrast ratio relative to the non-linked text color as satisfying the Success Criteria 1.4.1 Use of color since it is relying on contrast ratio as well as color (hue) to convey that the text is a link.

If we are not misunderstanding this (and I'm not the only one with the same interpretation), having different color (contrast + hue) is enough to satisfy 1.4.1, while having different color (hue) is not.

This is the reason we have in out applicability different hue, and we have in the expectation different contrast.

So, I'm not really sure if we are agreeing or disagreeing here :-) 
The current rule says, if you have different contrast + different hue you pass the rule. If you only have different hue (and nothing else) you do not.

- [C15: Using CSS to change the presentation of a user interface component when it receives focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C15)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishable style.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: hsl(0, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 2

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links (underline) when it is focused or hovered.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: hsl(0, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		text-decoration: none;
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a:hover,
	a:focus {
		text-decoration: underline;
	}

> </style>

Reviewer 8: Same issue here. https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1010/files#r517402431

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: hsl(0, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:hover,
	a:focus {
		border-style: solid;
		border-color: red;
		border-width: 0px;
		border-bottom-width: 1px;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 7

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable box-shadow.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: hsl(0, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
		box-shadow: 4px 4px;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 8

This link, with a **different hue** from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable font-style when it is focused.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: hsl(0, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: hsl(232, 50%, 25%);
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;

> 	}

Reviewer 8: Technique G183 has established a minimum contrast ratio of 3:1 to pass, when combined with a distinguishable hover style and a distinguishable focus style. However, the two colors in this example, hsl(0, 50%, 25%) and hsl(232, 50%, 25%), have a contrast ratio (relative luminance) of only 1.1:1.

This issue could be fixed one of these ways...

(1) Find a combination of two saturated foreground colors and one background color, such that the two foreground colors differ by at least 3:1 contrast ratio while also satisfying 1.4.3 Contrast (Minimum) against the background color. To conform to WCAG Level AA, I'm not sure if such a combination exists. It might only exist with large-scale text to meet 1.4.3. Or...

(2) Choose two saturated foreground colors which differ by at least 3:1 contrast ratio, but cannot meet 1.4.3 for any possible single background color and font size. Include a note stating that while this technique meets 1.4.1 and potentially WCAG Level A conformance, it cannot be used to achieve WCAG Level AA conformance because it will always fail 1.4.3. Or...

(3) Rewrite the overall rule so it addresses all color differences, not just hue differences, then choose two colors for this example with at least a 3:1 contrast ratio; or

(4) Let the overall rule continue to address hue differences only, and delete this passed example.

Author: I'm not sure what is the issue here. The colors were picked to have different hue while keeping to under 3:1 contrast ratio on purpose. That is because the example is showing one of the ways (a different font-style in this instance) that can be used to make the link different from the surrounding text besides the difference in color (hue).

Is this is fact the same issue that I replied to in https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1010/files#r518651304 ?

---
id: be4d0c
name: Inline link is distinguishable
rule_type: composite
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links have a way to distinguish them from any surrounding text other than color alone.
accessibility_requirements: # Remove whatever is not applicable
  wcag20:1.4.1: # Use of Color (A)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_rules:
  - 88407d
  - 548868
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and

> - **different color**: the element's [foreground color][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1, or the element's [background color][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1.

Author: Not sure why, if you leave color out, it would fail 1.3.1. You wouldn't have any presentation cues to apply 1.3.1 to, if I correctly understood what you're saying.

> - **different color**: the element's [foreground color][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1, or the element's [background color][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1.

Reviewer 5: Because I always believe that 1.3.1 goes both ways 😞 

---
Still, if there is no visual cues at all (not even colour) to distinguish an inline link, shouldn't it fails some WCAG SC? It feels weird that having a blue link in black text is bad (indicated only by colour) but a black link in black text is OK (no indication at all)…

> - **different color**: the element's [foreground color][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1, or the element's [background color][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [highest possible contrast][] that is at least 3.0:1.

Author: I would fail SC 1.4.11. A link (which is a UI component) should be visually identifiable from the surrounding colors. Then we have 1.4.1 to make sure that color is not the only means to provide such visual identification.

## Expectation

For each test target, the [outcome][] of one of the following rules is "passed":

- [Inline link has distinguishable style or content not based on color alone](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/88407d)
- [Inline link has distinguishing style or content on hover and focus](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/548868)

## Assumptions

> - The 3:1 contrast difference between text is minimal to what would be sufficient to meet WCAG 2.0. This value is part of [technique G183](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G183) but is not specified in the [1.4.1 success criterion](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html).

Author: Agree that the wording can be improved (I've tried to do it).
The assumption is that if this applies to something that is already distinguished by color, then the colors used must meet WCAG, i.e. their contrast must be at least 3:1.

- Any change in font is sufficiently distinguishable, and fonts are loaded when they are present.
- The same foreground color and the same background color is used by all the visible text nodes of the _ancestor_ element that are not part of the target element, otherwise color can not be a distinguishing factor.
- The same `box-shadow` is used by all the visible text nodes of the _ancestor_ element that are not part of the target element, otherwise `box-shadow` can not be a distinguishing factor.
- The same `border` is used by all the visible text nodes of the _ancestor_ element that are not part of the target element, otherwise `border` can not be a distinguishing factor.

## Accessibility Support

_No accessibility support issues known._

> ## Background

Author: The SC is specifically for situations where color is used to convey any type of information. I believe that readers will understand that the rule would be applicable only to those cases. Why do you think this needs to be reinforced?
(sorry if I misunderstood your point)

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html)
- [G183: Using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and providing additional visual cues on focus for links or controls where color alone is used to identify them](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G183)
- [F73: Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to creating links that are not visually evident without color vision](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F73)
- [C15: Using CSS to change the presentation of a user interface component when it receives focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C15)

## Test Cases

> ### Passed

Author: I usually do this, which also ensures implementations will test all of our examples. This is particularly important if there is only a single (composite) implementation, instead of multiple (atomic) ones.

#### Passed Example 1

> This link, that is distinguishable by color from the other text in the same line, uses the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishing style. This example passes rule "[Inline link has distinguishable style or content not based on color alone](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/88407d)".

Author: But if you don't override the style then you're dependent on the user that will test the example not having changed the default styles (check #1389 for this same issue popping up in another rule). 
I'll rephrase the description, but I don't agree that we should have an example where we don't control the style.

> This link, that is distinguishable by color from the other text in the same line, uses the default styling of links which underlines them in most browsers, making it a distinguishing style. This example passes rule "[Inline link has distinguishable style or content not based on color alone](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/88407d)".

Reviewer 5: It looks like browser settings (as mentioned in #1389) can only change font (size and font itself). So that shouldn't affect colours, borders, shadows, decorations, … which are used in this rule.

Thus said, I won't fight further for unstyled examples if you don't want them.

This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable font-style. This example passes rule "[Inline link has distinguishable style or content not based on color alone](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/88407d)".

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
		font-style: italic;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 7

This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has an icon that makes it distinguishable as a link. This example passes rule "[Inline link has either distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone or content that indicates it is a link](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/88407d)".

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>
<p>
	Read about WAI on the
	<a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage <img src="/test-assets/be4d0c/icon.png" alt="" /></a>.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 8

> This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has text that makes it distinguishable as a link. This example passes rule "[Inline link has either distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone or content that indicates it is a link](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/88407d)".

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, and has text that makes it distinguishable as a link. This example passes rule "[Inline link has either distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone or content that indicates it is a link](https://act-rules.github.io/rules/88407d)".
```

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>

> <p>Read about WAI on the <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage by following this link</a>.</p>

Reviewer 4: Perhaps this example should to be worded slightly differently so there is less implication the link is coming up next...

```suggestion
<p>To read about WAI, <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">follow this link to the WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

The subtleties of language!

---
id: be4d0c
name: Inline link has either distinguishable style not based on color (hue) alone or content that indicates it is a link
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that inline links are distinguishable from the surrounding text through a difference in style not based on color (hue) alone or have content that indicates they are links.

> accessibility_requirements:

Author: Very good catch! Lost it when moving from composite to atomic!

input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [visible][] HTML element that is a [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and
- **different hue**: the element's [foreground colors][foreground color] and the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the element's [background colors][background color] and the [background colors][background color] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

## Expectation

For all [interaction states][] there exists at least one [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] and one [adequate inspection state][] of the test target such that at least one of the following is true:

> - **distinguishing style**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has a [distinguishable style][] from the **non-link line text** elements; or

Author: 2 good suggestions in 1 comment 👍

- **distinguishing content**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] has adjacent content (such as an image or text) that indicates the test target is a link.

## Assumptions

- Any change in font is sufficiently distinguishable, and fonts are loaded when they are present.
- The same foreground color and the same background color is used by all the visible text nodes of the _ancestor_ element that are not part of the target element, otherwise color can not be a distinguishing factor.
- The same `box-shadow` is used by all the visible text nodes of the _ancestor_ element that are not part of the target element, otherwise `box-shadow` can not be a distinguishing factor.

> - The same `border` is used by all the visible text nodes of the _ancestor_ element that are not part of the target element, otherwise `border` can not be a distinguishing factor.

Author: I find it easier to have an assumption for each of the distinguishing styles than try to group this into a unified assumption. (but if more people feels that we should change, or if you insist, we can change).
I'll add the missing assumption for text styles, and also remove the reference to the ancestor node (which was used in a previous version of the applicability/expectation and got lost in the changes)

## Accessibility Support

_No accessibility support issues known._

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.1: Use of Color](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/use-of-color.html)
- [G183: Using a contrast ratio of 3:1 with surrounding text and providing additional visual cues on focus for links or controls where color alone is used to identify them](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G183)
- [F73: Failure of Success Criterion 1.4.1 due to creating links that are not visually evident without color vision](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/failures/F73)
- [C15: Using CSS to change the presentation of a user interface component when it receives focus](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/css/C15)

> 

Reviewer 5: I think we should add a background note in the line of "default styling is good; we need the examples to override it to illustrate the rule, but you shouldn't". To limit the risk of people seeing the Passed Examples and believing they need to do the same.

Author: I've added a note about this. Please review it.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a.test {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
</style>
<p>To read about WAI, <a class="test" href="http://w3.org/WAI">follow this link to the WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 9

This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links (underline) when it is focused or hovered.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		text-decoration: none;
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a:hover,
	a:focus {
		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 10

This link, that is distinguishable by the background color (hue) from the other text in the same line, uses a style similar to the default styling of links (underline) when it is focused or hovered.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: black;

> 		background-color: #c84d32;

Reviewer 5: named color would be better.

		text-decoration: underline;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

> #### Passed Example 11

Reviewer 5: I feel there are too many examples now that the rules are merged…

This example, typically, doesn't show anything that Passed Examples 3 (role inherit from link) or 4 (distinguishing border, not underline) already show…

There are many moving pieces in that rule and I am not sure we need examples for all combinations. I'd rather go for a default case (Passed Example 1, essentially) + variation on a single theme (e.g. PE2: different bg is OK, PE3: role inheriting from link is OK; …) but no need to make all combinations imho.

Author: Reduced the number of passed examples, by removing some combinations

	}
</style>
<p>This is indicated in the cost of a <a href="#bcc0f155" role="doc-glossref">credit default swap</a>.</p>
<h1>Glossary</h1>
<p id="bcc0f155">
	A credit default swap (CDS) is a financial derivative or contract that allows an investor to "swap" or offset his or
	her credit risk with that of another investor.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 12

This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable bottom border when it is hovered or focused.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:hover,
	a:focus {
		border-style: solid;
		border-color: red;
		border-width: 0px;
		border-bottom-width: 1px;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 13

This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has a distinguishable box-shadow when it is hovered or focused.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	a:hover,

> 	a:focus {

Reviewer 5: OTOH, all the H/F examples have the distinguishing stuff both on H and on F.
Should there be example with only `a:hover` and example with only `a:focus`?

Author: There are now :-)

	}
	a:hover,
	a:focus {
		font-style: italic;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Passed Example 15

This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has an icon that appears when the link is focused or hovered. This icon indicates the element is a link.

```html
<style>
	p {
		color: black;
		background-color: white;
	}
	a {
		color: blue;
		background-color: white;
		text-decoration: none;
	}
	.hide {
		display: none;
	}
	a:hover img.hide,
	a:focus img.hide {
		display: inline;
	}
</style>
<p>
	Read about WAI on the
	<a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage <img class="hide" src="/test-assets/be4d0c/icon.png" alt="" /></a>.
</p>
```

#### Passed Example 16

This link had a descendant element that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line and has a distinguishable bottom border when it is hovered or focused.

```html
<style>
	a {
		text-decoration: none;
	}

	a:hover span,
	a:focus span {
		border-bottom: 2px solid currentColor;
	}
</style>

<p>
	Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI"><span>WAI webpage</span></a
	>.
</p>
```

> 

Reviewer 5: I think we need to illustrate the interaction state. So probably a link whose distinguishing stuff changes whether it's `:link` or `:visited`. (ideally changing between style and content to make the meaning of the alternate quantifiers clear)

Author: Because of privacy concerns, one cannot do everything it pleases with the `:visited` pseudo-classes (e.g. cannot use `:after`, which would be nice to add content). But I'll come up with something based on the different styles that are available for change.

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

> This link, that is distinguishable by color (hue) from the other text in the same line, has no other visual cues of being recognized as a link with the underline removed. Even though the link has a different color (blue) from the other text (black) the low difference in contrast between them means they are not distinguishing colors.

Reviewer 5: Seeing that sentence, I understand that if contrast was high enough, everything would be fine. Which I seem to remember as being the conclusion of an earlier discussion…

In which case we probably need a Passed Example where contrast is the only good thing…

Author: Good catch

		background-color: white;
	}
</style>
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

### Inapplicable

#### Inapplicable Example 1

There is no [semantic link][] element.

```html
<p>Read about WAI on the <u>underlined text</u>.</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

This link is not [visible][].

```html
<p>Read about WAI on the <a href="http://w3.org/WAI" style="visibility:hidden">WAI webpage</a>.</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

This link is the only text rendered in its line.

```html
<p><a href="http://w3.org/WAI">WAI webpage</a></p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 4

Each link is the only text rendered in their respective lines.

```html
<ul>
	<li><a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/non-text-content.html">SC 1.1.1</a></li>
	<li><a href="https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/audio-only-and-video-only-prerecorded">SC 1.2.1</a></li>
</ul>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 5

There is no text belonging to non [semantic links][semantic link] in this line.

```html
<p><a href="https://www.w3.org">W3C </a><span role="link" onclick="location='https://www.w3.org/WAI/'">WAI</span></p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 6

> This link is not distinguishable by color from the other text rendered in its line.

Reviewer 5: Need to explain that the hue is the same 😉 because the hex codes are different, which makes it very confusing that they are not distinguishable by color.

Actually, it might be even clearer if the colors are written in HSL syntax directly…

Author: Good suggestion. I've added the HSL value as a comment.

> This link is not distinguishable by color from the other text rendered in its line.

Reviewer 5: And I'm suddenly wondering why we want this to be inapplicable and not passed (the contrast between both colors is 3.78:1, better than 3:1).

I can't remember why the Applicability is about "different hue" and not just "different color" 🤔

Author: You can check your comment here https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1010#discussion_r467945568 ;-)

Reviewer 5: 😅 
Then I guess we need to record that in an assumption (or background note) in the line of

> This rule considers that 1.4.1 only applies if the thingies have different hue. If hues are the same and saturation or lightness isn't, this creates a difference in contrast, not in the perceived color and 1.4.1 doesn't apply + maybe link to Understanding document where we get that interpretation from… If 1.4.1 applies to thingies that have same hue but different S/L, this rule will be inapplicable while 1.4.1 may still fail.

  authors:
    - Brian Bors
    - Carlos Duarte
  previous_authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
---

## Applicability

This rule applies to each [link history state][] of any [semantic link][], for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the [semantic link][] element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the [semantic link][] element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and

> - **different hue**: the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the [semantic link's][semantic link] **link text** and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the [semantic link's][semantic link] [background colors][background color] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

Reviewer 5: Technically we want "the semantic link **in this link history state** blah blah". But then I guess this is unambiguous enough that way that we don't need to be that precise since it actually hampers legibility a bit.

> - **different hue**: the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the [semantic link's][semantic link] **link text** and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the [semantic link's][semantic link] [background colors][background color] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

Reviewer 5: Should also be "the foreground colors of the text node of the non-link line text element".

I guess it might be worth creating a "foreground colors of an element" definition, similar to the "background colors of an element" in this PR.

Alternatively, extend "FG/BG colors of text" to apply to any node and say "if it's a text node, [current def], if it's an element, get the FG/BG color of text of its descendants" might do the trick.

Author: I'm going with your suggestion of creating a new "foreground colors of element". I think that is the one that will mostly streamline the reading of this.

> - **different hue**: the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the [semantic link's][semantic link] **link text** and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the [semantic link's][semantic link] [background colors][background color] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

Reviewer 2: Still don't quite get why the hue has to be different for this rule to apply. What is that based on?

Author: It's based on this

> The Use of Color success criterion addresses changing only the color (hue) of an object or text without otherwise altering the object's form.

It's quoted from https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/non-text-contrast.html

## Expectation

> For each [link history state][] of the [semantic link][] there exists at least one [adequate inspection state][] and at least one [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or [ancestor][] element that is not an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text**, such that at least one of the following is true:

Reviewer 5: The "For each link history state" part doesn't make sense with the new Applicability.
I'm struggling a bit to find a nice formulation…
"For each test target, there exist at least one adequate inspection state of the link with this history state" just sounds bad.

Author: I don't agree that it sounds bad :-)
I'm changing it accordingly.

- **link text**: the [semantic link][] element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the [semantic link][] element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and
- **different hue**: the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the [semantic link][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the [background colors][background color] of the [semantic link][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

## Expectation 1

For each test target, there exists at least one [inspection state][] that is not [focused][] and [hovered][] at the same time and at least one [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or [ancestor][] element that is not an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text**, such that the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or the [ancestor][] element has a [distinguishable style][] from each element containing **non-link line text**.

## Expectation 2

> If the test target matches the [`:any-link` pseudo-class](https://drafts.csswg.org/selectors-4/#any-link-pseudo), Expectation 1 must hold for each [link history state][] with a **different hue**.

Reviewer 5: I'm not fully sure about that articulation. The point is that Expectation 1 depends on the tester.
If I go to Failed Example 2 without viewing the link first, I would pass Expectation 1 and fail Expectation 2. On the other hand, if I go to that page after viewing the link (the link would be `:visited` when I arrive), I would fail both Expectations.

This is maybe not a huge deal given that the end result is the same (rule fails), but still weird that the individual expectation depend on the tester.

I'm tackling the same issue a bit differently in #1455 where I need to consider even more states. Not sure this can help here…

Author: As you said, the end result is the same. Given that expectation 2 will always force you to inspect all link history states, unless the first one you checked immediately fails expectation 1, there is no way different testers will reach different results. 

If more people feel this is something that needs to be addressed, then I can look into it, but I don't really think it needs changing.

> If the test target matches the [`:any-link` pseudo-class](https://drafts.csswg.org/selectors-4/#any-link-pseudo), Expectation 1 must hold for each [link history state][] with a **different hue**.

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. I agree it's better to be clear abou that. Just rewording it since :any_link does not have "sub classes".

## Applicability

This rule applies to any [semantic link][] for which all the following is true:

- **link text**: the [semantic link][] element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the [semantic link][] element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and
- **different hue**: the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the [semantic link][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the [background colors][background color] of the [semantic link][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

## Expectation 1

For each test target there exists at least one element with a [distinguishable style][] from each **non-link line text** elements for which one of the following is true:

- the element is a [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] of the test target; or

> - the element is [ancestor][] of the test target that is not simultaneously an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text** elements.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- the element is an [ancestor][] of the test target that is not simultaneously an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text** elements.
```

> - the element is [ancestor][] of the test target that is not simultaneously an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text** elements.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- the element is an [ancestor][] of the test target that is not simultaneously an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text** elements.
```

> - the element is [ancestor][] of the test target that is not simultaneously an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text** elements.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- the element is an [ancestor][] of the test target that is not simultaneously an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text** elements.
```

> - the element is [ancestor][] of the test target that is not simultaneously an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text** elements.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- the element is an [ancestor][] of the test target that is not simultaneously an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text** elements.
```

## Expectation 2

Either the test target does not match the [`:any-link` pseudo-class](https://drafts.csswg.org/selectors-4/#any-link-pseudo), or Expectation 1 holds for each [link history state][] with a **different hue**.

## Expectation 3

> Expectation 1 holds irrespectively of the test target being [focused][] or [hovered][].

Reviewer 5: Just to make it clear, I understand that this requires the 4 states to be valid, correct?

Author: Correct

> Expectation 1 holds irrespectively of the test target being [focused][] or [hovered][].

Reviewer 5: It's not fully clear how Expectation 2 and 3 work together.
I guess the intend is to have correct indication in the 8 possible states?

I suggest we wait until Thursday's join call to figure what to do.

Author: Correct once again. I split the "state handling" part of the rule into 2 different expectations to make it easier to read (given that the 2 dimensions link/visited and hover/focus are independent).

Reviewer 5: But with Expectation 3 referring only to Expectation 1, it is not clear that, say `:visited` and `:focus` should be OK.

(also, hover/focus are actually 2 independent dimensions, if we want one expectation per dimension, we could split them)

Author: I was thinking that just as soon as I sent my message.
Probably the best way to handle this is move expectation 3 to expectation 2, and then have expectation 3 (link/visited) requesting expectation 2 to hold.

But I agree that it's best to leave this to after Thursday's meeting.

## Expectation

> There exists at least one [inclusive descendant element][] and one [adequate inspection state][] of the test target such that at least one of the following is true for all [interaction states][]:

Reviewer 5: 🤔 The way I read this, it must be the same descendant, inspection state and condition that is true for all interaction states.

So:
* has a link icon when not visited, underlined when visited
* underlined when not visited but focused; underlined when visited and not focused

would both fail the rule.

These ure both fairly bad design (I say), but I am not sure this really a WCAG failure.
If we want to allow the element to pass in various ways depending on the interaction state, we need to put the universal quantifier first:
> for all interaction states, there exist at least …

- **link text**: the [semantic link][] element has [visible][] [text nodes][text node] as [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **non-link line text**: the [semantic link][] element is [rendered on a line][] containing [visible][] [text nodes][text node] that are not [descendants][descendant] in the [flat tree][] of a [semantic link][]; and

> - **different hue**: the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the [semantic link's][semantic link] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the [semantic link's][semantic link] [background colors][background color] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].

Reviewer 5: Nitpicking alignement of wordings…(+ cleaning up a bit).
```suggestion
- **different hue**: the [foreground colors][foreground color] of the [semantic link][] and the [foreground color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][], or the [background colors][background color] 
 of the [semantic link][] and the [background color][] of the **non-link line text** elements have a [different hue][].
```

## Expectation

> For at least one element of the set comprised by the test target and all of its [visible][] [descendant][] elements in the [flat tree][], the [outcome][] of one of the following rules is "passed":

Reviewer 5: We can't do that in a composite rule (the composite rule can't manipulate the DOM tree and doesn't know what a descendant is https://www.w3.org/TR/act-rules-format/#expectations-composite " A composite rule expectation must not use information from input aspects.")

OTOH, it's not needed. The Atomic rules are already doing that digging down the descendant, so a link will pass one atomic rule if the link or descendant is good, and the composite rule will be happy.

## Expectation

> For each target, when its [semantic link][] is not in the [focused][] state and the [hovered][] state at the same time, there exists at least one [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or [ancestor][] element that is not an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text**, such that the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or the [ancestor][] element has a [distinguishable style][] from each element containing **non-link line text**.

Reviewer 5: I understand that as different from the previous version…
"there exist at least one adequate state [where this is good]" means we pass if this is good in (not H, not F) OR in (H, not F) OR in (not H, F).
"when it is not H and F at the same time", first, it is less clear that we need to check the various inspection states. Second, I understand it as needed to be good in all of (not H, not F) AND (H, not F) AND (not H, F) states.

Author: I agree. This seems to imply that it needs to be true in all of those states. 
I'm backtracking a bit in the expectation, accordingly.

This rule applies to any HTML element which:

- **(is a link)** has the [semantic role][] of ['link'][link] or a [semantic role][] that inherits from the ['link'][link] role; and
- **(visible)** has [descendant][] [text nodes][text node] in the [flat tree][] that are [visible][]; and

> - **(belongs to a block container)** is a [descendant][] in the [flat tree][] of an HTML element (with the closest [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] being henceforth referred to as the _ancestor_ element) that has a [computed value][] for the [display property][display] that is not one of the following: 'table', 'flex', 'grid', 'ruby', 'table-row-group', 'table-header-group', 'table-footer-group', 'table-row', table-column-group', 'table-column', 'ruby-base-container' and 'ruby-text-container'; and

Reviewer 6: For me, this is the one that is more difficult to understand. I am not really sure how we could clarify this @WilcoFiers  @carlosapaduarte . 

Just trying to help clarifying this. as said above.

```suggestion
- **(belongs to a block container)** is a [descendant][] in the [flat tree][] of an HTML element whose closest [ancestor][] (the _ancestor_ element) has a [computed value][] for its [display property][display] that is not one of the following: 'table', 'flex', 'grid', 'ruby', 'table-row-group', 'table-header-group', 'table-footer-group', 'table-row', table-column-group', 'table-column', 'ruby-base-container' and 'ruby-text-container'; and
```

* Is there a need to mention the flat tree twice? By specifying it at the beginning of the sentence, I think it is clear that we are consistently meaning "the flat tree". If we were to mean another tree in the same sentence, we could well specify it.
* We are using "closest ancestor". Do we really want to mean "grand-parent node?

Author: The multiple mentions to the flat tree are there to ensure the applicability is not ambiguous. 

The closest ancestor is the closest ancestor. It might be the parent in the DOM, or the great-parent, or the great-great-parent. It depends on what nodes of the DOM are in the flat tree.

- **(other content in block)** the _ancestor_ element has other [descendant][] [visible][] [text nodes][text node] in the [flat tree][]; and
- **(block is inline)** the [descendant][] [visible][] [text nodes][text node] of the _ancestor_ element belong to the same [inline formatting context][].

> **Note**: The test targets are visible link elements that are part of a block of content that is displayed inline .

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
**Note**: The test targets are visible link elements that are part of a block of content that is displayed inline.
```

For each test target, there exists at least one [adequate inspection state][] and at least one [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or [ancestor][] element that is not an [ancestor][] of the **non-link line text**, such that at least one of the following is true:

- **distinguishing style**: the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or the [ancestor][] element has a [distinguishable style][] from each element containing **non-link line text**; or

> - **distinguishing content**: the [text nodes][text node] of the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or the [text nodes][text node] [visible][] of the [inclusive sibling][] include the word "link" (or a translation of "link" to the [default page language][]).

Reviewer 5: minor point: should be the language of the element, not of the page.
```html
<html lang="fr>
<p lang="en">link: <a href="…>Foo</a></p>
</html>
```

Author: This has been solved by removing the distinguishable content from the expectation

> - **distinguishing content**: the [text nodes][text node] of the [visible][] [inclusive descendant][] or the [text nodes][text node] [visible][] of the [inclusive sibling][] include the word "link" (or a translation of "link" to the [default page language][]).

Reviewer 5: Major point: I'm really not sure about this change…

I'm not sure that the new Failed Example 3 (`<p>click here: <a …>foo</a></p>`) is failing the SC since "click here" can be understood as "this is a link". And `<p>to read about W3C <a href="…">click here</a></p>` would also fail the rule but I'd say that most people would understand "click here" as "this very text is a link".

Similarly, the old Passed Example 11 (`<p>Read about <img src="link-icon" /><a href="…">W3C</a></p>`) is now failing the rule, but again I'm not sure it is failing the SC.
(actually, since it was a Passed Example in the previous version of the rule, we were all convinced it was passing the SC because of the [Consistency With Accessibility Requirements](https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/blob/develop/pages/design/test-cases.md#consistency-with-accessibility-requirements) of our test cases).

Also, I'm not sure this change really lessen the "encourage bad link names" effects that @mitchellevan was referring in https://github.com/act-rules/act-rules.github.io/pull/1010#discussion_r517267821 because this sounds like each link should have the word "link" next to it.

I think we can definitely add a Background note in the line of "yeah, `click this link` passes the rule but fails 2.4.9 and maybe 2.4.4."

Author: Looking back at the change, I don't think I'm too comfortable with it either. Requiring the text to use the work "link" is too restraining. 

Given the difficulties in arriving at a consensual definition for "distinguishing content" (both for what is text or icons that distinguish something is a link and where can they be placed), how would everyone feel with removing that from the expectation and creating an assumption that there is no text or icons or other means that identify the link as such?

Reviewer 5: That would definitely work.
* I don't know how broad of an assumption this would end up being, that is what proportion of web pages or targets would violate it. If the assumption is too broad, that might weaken the rule quite a bit. OTOH, we don't really know that now and having implementations of the rule might be the best way to gather data…
* At the same time, I'd say that **distinguishing style** is a better practice than **distinguishing content** in any case… So only keeping the former might just end up having a stricter rule (with an assumption to keep the mapping), which is rather good.

So, yeah, I think this is worth trying and maybe we'll need to re-evaluate once we have data from tool vendors…

Author: Removed it

#### Failed Example 2

> This link, that is a descendant of a paragraph element, has a border not visible because it has a width of zero.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This link, that is a descendant of a paragraph element, has a not visible border because it has a width of zero.
```

#### Failed Example 3

> This link, that is a descendant of a paragraph element, has a border not visible because its color is transparent.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This link, that is a descendant of a paragraph element, has a not visible border because its color is transparent.
```

[flat tree]: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-scoping/#flat-tree 'Definition of flat tree'
[foreground color]: #foreground-colors-of-text 'Definition of foreground colors of text'
[inclusive descendant]: https://dom.spec.whatwg.org/#concept-tree-inclusive-descendant 'Definition of inclusive descendant'

> [link history state]: https://drafts.csswg.org/selectors-4/#link 'Definition of Link History pseudo-classes'

Reviewer 5: We should link to the definitions in https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/semantics-other.html#pseudo-classes
which might require an intermediate definition 😕

Author: I considered this when preparing the last PR, but I could not convince myself about the advantages of doing it. 

- There is no way, that I could think of, to reflect the semantics of :link and :visited from the html spec, while these are immediately understandable from the css spec. 
- And, as you say, replacing this would require an indirection (the intermediate definition, that in fact would be doing exactly the same that the link to the css spec does).

Could you elaborate on why we should link to the html spec?

Reviewer 5: Indeed I haven't looked into too much detail into the HTML version, but for `:link` and `:visited`, it is not adding much…

OTOH, it is adding a lot of precision for `:hover` and `:focus`… And we already have a definition for "inspection states". Maybe there we could update the link, or at least add a note "for HTML elements, see also …"

Author: That might be more useful, indeed. I'll have another look at this.
